#Democratic Primary Debates 2020
---
## What steps did I take?
My first task for this project was finding the data. After examining it for a bit I thought it seemed fairly interesting to examine further. Then I loaded the data into openrefine and cleaned the data. I normalized the dates and formats of the debate names. I knew I probably wouldn't need the names, but I wanted to have them in an easy to use form if needed. I also checked to make sure all of the speakers were normalized and that there were no typos in the speaker column. I also ended up changing the dates to openrefine's date format so that I could examine them as dates. Finally, I exported the data, but I actually exported 2 different versions. 1 version includes entries from one debate in which the speaking time is blank. The other does not include these entries. I wasn't entirely sure what to do with these entries, but I didn't really want them entered as 0s because that's not correct either. 

After cleaning the data I created an HTML file and wrote a few comments in a js file to remind me of what I was planning on doing with my visualizations. I wanted to make 4 charts: 1 comparing speaking times per candidate, 1 showing delegates the candidates had earned, 1 showing percentages the candidates had earned for each primary, and 1 showing the most common words used in the debates. Initially, I wanted to use 1 chart for the delegates and percentages, but I found that there wasn't really any effective way to do that since you wouldn't really be able to compare percentages if you were looking at raw delegate numbers since percentages really need to be shown against one another for their specific primary. 

For the actual visualizations, I created a basic bar chart for speaking time because it's as simple as summing the speaking times and displaying them. Initially, I was displaying the names on the bottom of the chart, but I thought it looked better on the side. For the second chart, I created a stacked bar chart. This one took a while because I wasn't exactly sure how to create a stacked bar chart. A lot of the examples I found online also were for vertical charts so I had to parse it into what I needed. I also kept finding examples for previous versions of d3. Eventually, I did figure out how to make it work though. My third chart is also a basic bar chart. I was actually able to just use the same function as the first chart by just adding more parameters to the function. Finally, for the final chart, I used some code from a previous project I did in which I made a word cloud. Mostly this was for actually transforming the data and examining the words. For the actual visualization, I adapted some code I found online at http://bl.ocks.org/joews/9697914 and https://github.com/jasondavies/d3-cloud. These examples use 1 of d3's layouts: the cloud layout. 

## What did I find?
Primarily, I found that my original hypothesis was correct. Most of the candidates with the highest speaking times have done the best in the actual primaries, receiving the most delegates. Any candidate with less than 7,000 seconds of total speaking time hasn't won any delegates as all. However, this isn't to say there is a direct correlation. The candidates with the 2 highest speaking times, Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren, are not both winning, but Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders, the 2 candidates with the most delegates, do both have more than 9300 seconds of speaking time. Additionally, Elizabeth Warren, the candidate with the second most speaking time, only has around as many delegates as Michael Bloomberg, a candidate who didn't join the democratic primary race until much later and who has only around 1600 seconds of total speaking time, 5.5x less than Warren. 

I also think that examining the most spoken words by each candidate is very interesting. Once again, mostly the results are what I expected, but there were many more references to Donald Trump than I was initally expecting. 

## My Challenges
The biggest challenges I think I found were in using charts that we hadn't used yet in class, using d3's layout system. I knew I wanted to do a word cloud and stacked bar chart though so I just did a lot of research trying to figure out how to use them. I am very happy with how they turned out though for the most part. The only problem I really ended up having that I couldn't solve is regarding the stacked bar chart. I couldn't figure out how to get it to update dynamically based on date, which is something I initally wanted to do. However, after thinking about it and after trying to solve the problem for a while, I decided that it isn't really necessary to be able to choose based on date as there is a tooltip on the chart that shows how many delegates each candidate earned for a particular state and that would be the primary purpose for being able to choose a date: being able to isolate certain elections. Another problem I had, has to do with the tooltip. I couldn't figure out how to effectively create a multiline tooltip that breaks where I want it to everytime. I tried using \n to create a new line, but that didn't work. I also read that, when using template literals, you are supposed to be able to just hit enter for a new line and that is supposed to create a new line, but I also couldn't get that to work. It just create a tab or an empty space of some kind anyway. 